Article one: By Fernando Ostanelli, Head of Delivery and Felipe Brito, Business Director. Part I - Why you should overcome false dichotomies and start measuring productivity When someone dares to say that it is indeed possible to track performance and productivity of agile teams, criticism pours from all over. It seems that Newton's Law of universal gravitation is being challenged. People get really emotional and conversations get heated rapidly. The arguments goes from impossibility to senselessness and generally fall on one of the categories below: "It is impossible to measure productivity, because software development is an art and thus cannot be measured." "It is counterproductive to measure productivity, because the team will find ways to game the system (by reducing the size of the stories, compromising quality or using any other cop out strategy)" "Agile methodology provides the best environment for self-sufficient teams to learn and evolve. There is no need to measure productivity, because the best productivity possible will be achieved 'per design' and according to the methodology goals.” "Measuring productivity implies distrust of management towards the team and it probably means a stratagem to cover other problems in the agile environment (lack of information, lack of expertise, lack of accountability, lack of partnership...)" Naysayers claim that what really matters is value activation after software is delivered to the customer. We do agree that value to the customer is the end goal, but we feel very uneasy with the complacency of the community towards such an important topic. The fact that other thought leaders embrace this pseudo-truth when they could challenge it and propose a more meaningful answer to this issue is disturbing in our opinion. From manufacturing to sports, from education to agriculture, from media to dance.... The fact that several other industries have been so passionate about metrics and transformed themselves throughout the years just reinforces our belief that we need to do more! Much more! Regardless of what led people to create the theses above and how they became "truths," we question them. We believe that passionate and self-organizing teams are always striving to improve, but numbers will only support their journey. Metrics help us understand the status quo and provide insights for actions. Moreover, metrics allow us to make informed decisions by providing the reasons of specific findings. With metrics, we have information that supports preventative or corrective action. We have data to guide us towards prioritization of next steps and directions for better outcomes. In the end, we have a clearer path towards continuous improvement. For the skeptical people that say it is impossible to measure productivity because software development is an art, we say try harder! Take a look at the publishing industry or the music industry... Everybody works with timelines and goals. Writers have agreements with publishers for constant releases, and musicians with record labels. For the other skeptical groups claiming that the team could game the system… People can always game the system. There are millions of them committing crimes and going to jail because they game the system. This is a false solution for not having the right people on board. If you cannot trust your team, you have a much bigger problem than not getting productivity measured. For those people that believe that measuring productivity is a waste of time, we see this as nonsense. Even if there is a belief that the team is always pushing towards continuous improvement the best way they can, wouldn't it be better to have a compass and a speedometer to guide them so their journey can be more gratifying? It's like Usain Bolt not wanting to get his time recorded because he can get more training time and can compete more if he doesn't lose time getting his time registered. It makes no sense to us. Usain Bolt and all the other sprinters analyze every slice of their 10-second races, even before they start to run! Their diet, their sleep, how they set their bodies before the gun goes off, how fast they are reacting to the shot, their muscle explosion, their acceleration to get their body and head erect, their peak speed... Finally, for those who believe that metrics are a means used by management to squeeze teams towards unreasonable goals, we suggest finding another place to build their career. If you cannot trust your leadership, your fate is already sealed. Leadership exists to serve the team, remove the main obstacles from its path, and provide guidance. If you have tyrannous management, the lack of metrics will not make your life easier. It's another false dilemma. We have observed that several factors can jeopardize productivity including lack of skill, lack of communication and misuse of process. Without data is very hard to implement corrective actions or to set the stage for new improvements. Our retrospective meetings would be a pointless forum of things that did not go well or that could be improved, but without directions or practical actions. Our teams would not be able to assess how fast they were going or how good was their solution. Without benchmarks the team could not grasp how efficient they have been and what the trend would be. They might have been willing to get better, but with no awareness on what to adjust or in which direction they should push. We are passionate about lean thinking and for us it is imperative to have the business drivers in mind and quickly turn value around, while minimizing waste. However our capacity to grasp the current scenario and understand our evolution throughout the sprints is as important! Metrics give us insights and allow us to act upon improvement opportunities that will make us be even better! And we go beyond! We advocate that teams should themselves collect, interpret and act upon their data. This reinforces autonomy and supports the ultimate goal of continuous improvement and people development. That's why we say that we build people before building software! In the second part of this article we will show you how to implement a productivity measurement program: we will share a method on how to determine complexity (or size) of software in a clear, standardized and objective way. And how to use this as a stepping stone to manage productivity, by tackling the misunderstanding and misconceptions surrounding this topic.